IMPORTANT: Only one member of your team should upload the status report.
It is natural for your project to morph over time. The goal of the status report is to (1) make sure you have been working on your project, (2) give details about project elements that weren't apparent at the time of the project proposal, and (3) give you a chance to explain how what you're hoping to do has changed. It also gives us a chance to provide feedback to help you along.
Your status report should include verbatim the project proposal that you originally submitted and directly add to it. Please make it easy to see what was in the original proposal versus what is new text. One good way to show what is new versus what was already there is to use a different colored font for your new text to distinguish it from the earlier proposal text.
The best-case scenario is that things are going exactly as you planned, which would make your status report trivial to prepare. But things never go exactly as planned. It is totally OK if things have changed or there's more that you didn't think of at the time of the proposal. This update will most typically include things like the following:
We didn't realize that doing part X was so hard, so it's taking us longer to do it and we had to scale back some other part Y.
We said we would do X but it doesn't seem to be working so we decided to instead do some modified version of X.
We discovered this great software/data resource which simplifies X, which means we're now going to try to do something bigger, X+Y.
We learned that the great software/data resource X that we expected to use wasn't available, so we're instead using Y.
We thought more about how to evaluate the project, and instead of doing X we now realize that it will be better to do Y.
 
Please also provide an updated timeline. It should say which items in the original timeline have been done, and what (if anything) you are changing in the timeline given what you've learned about the project thus far. Similarly, if the planned division of labor has changed, say so. Please also add any additional references to technical papers or websites if relevant.
We expect to have seen substantive work by this point in the semester, and it is a component of the effort portion of your grade.




Title: Modular NLP Framework for Domain-Specific Information Extraction: Application to Famine Studies
Team Members: Leane Ying (ly374), Patrick Reilly (pjr99), Gregory Marzano (gam268)
AI Keywords: Natural Language Processing (NLP), Named Entity Recognition (NER), Knowledge Representation (KR), Information Extraction
Application Setting: This project is intended to be used on academic research papers in famine studies (including historical, economic, public health analyses of famine events, etc.) in order to help famine researchers. Our system will process the papers and extract structured metadata related to the specific famine events, then normalize and aggregate the results.
Description:


This project will create a domain-specific NLP pipeline that transforms unstructured academic research papers on historical famines into both machine-readable structured data and human-readable output. Famine research papers contain valuable information that is often inconsistently formatted and difficult to parse. Using NLP techniques such as named entity recognition and relation extraction, the system will identify and extract key event-level attributes that will be mapped into a standardized schema.
As previously stated, the output will be delivered in two formats which work together: a machine-readable representation which includes structured JSON and graph-based data formats will allow computers to compare different famine cases and a human-readable summary to enable researchers to understand and verify the information. The system will handle research on famine studies specifically through its modular architecture which will divide research-paper parsing work into general components and domain-specific schemas. The system design will allow scalability to other academic disciplines without needing to change the core system design.


Our project is a schema based information retrieval system that will be built on top of transformer based language models. Rather than relying on simple ‘summarization,’ we plan to define a structured famine-event schema (such as with event name, location, time span, mortality estimates, reported causes, policy responses, etc.) and use pretrained models with targeted prompting or light fine tuning to extract entities and relations that fill this schema. This ensures consistent, comparable outputs of the free-form text. 

The pipeline will include document preprocessing, entity recognition, relation extraction and post processing normalization. Since famine studies give inconsistent metrics (like raw counts vs percentages), we will implement rule-based normalization to standardize units and their representations before exporting this data to structured json files. The architecture would also theoretically separate NLP components from famine specific schema logic, meaning the framework would be adaptable to other domains. 
We will evaluate our system using quantitative and comparative models. First we can manually annotate a subset of the research papers for a “gold standard,” or verified dataset. Using this dataset, we can measure precision, recall, and F1 score for entity and relation extraction, as well as accuracy of normalized outputs to ensure that the structured data reliably represents source text. 
Also, we will compare our schema driven method to a baseline such as unconstrained LLM summarization. We will test whether structured extraction improves our consistency and enables reliable cross paper queries (such as retrieving famines by region or time period). Our success would not only be defined by both strong extraction metrics as well as the system’s ability to support aggregating results across studies. 
Planning and Design: 
Week 1-2: 
We would create our subset of research papers from a variety of different ranges of sources, such as historical, economic, and public health perspectives to create our corpus. We’ll design a famine-event schema to capture the attributes like name, geographic location, time span, mortality estimates, causes, and resolution, as well as developing our document preprocessing and NLP components. Document preprocessing is key for the first couple of weeks.
Week 3-6: 
After finalizing the schema, we can begin the NLP implementation. We can use NER components using pretrained transformer models that have domain-specific prompting or light fine-tuning to identify relevant entities. We can define relationships between locations, dates, and causes to find relation extraction. We can also work on normalization rules for quantities and dates at the same time. A checkpoint at the end of these weeks would run the pipeline on a small sample of papers with our schema outputs. 
Week 7-8
After we have a working implementation we can begin to focus on making sure outputs are consistent, usable, and comparable. We can solidify our export into standardized JSON to support cross-paper comparison. We can generate readable summaries for revision as well. We can revise our model and make any chances necessary. 
Week 9-11 
Once we have usable output, we can evaluate it and run a comparative analysis among a larger set of data. We can measure precision and F1 for the relation extraction, and the accuracy of normalized values. We can also identify common errors and add fixes. 
Week 11-13
The final part of our project will consist of adding minor refinements to our model and mostly of writing up our technical results and report and preparing for our final presentation. We can synthesize our results and determine our findings. We will ensure our code is cleaned and ready for submission. 
We will mostly rely on established NLP software and curated academic data resources. We’ll implement the system in Python using pretrained transformer-based language models through the Hugging Face Transformer library, along with supporting NLP tools like spaCy for text preprocessing and Pytorch for model fine-tuning and evaluation. The primary data sources will be peer-reviewed academic journals about famine studies that span wide historical, economic, and public health perspectives.



